We study Boussinesq convection by computing marginally-stable mean temperature profiles for various Ra which are thermal equilibria of the quasilinear equations. We find these marginally-stable thermal equilibria (MSTE) by solving 1D eigenvalue problems and allowing the mean temperature to evolve according to diffusion and advection by the eigenmodes. The mode amplitudes are chosen such that the mean temperature maintains marginally stability. We find that multiple marginally-stable modes become important for Ra > 10^6, and Nu ~ Ra^(1/3) up to our maximum Ra = 10^9.

Description (attempt 1):

Using a separation of timescales approach, we compute quasilinear marginally-stable thermal equilibria (MSTE) for Boussinesq convection via the Dedalus pseudo-spectral python framework. We use Rayleigh's classical linear stability arguments to collapse the problem into a single dimension, representing the mean temperature profile with Chebyshev polynomials and the perturbations as the superposition of marginally-stable eigenmodes. We find that high-wavenumber modes become particularly important as the Rayleigh number increases and, in this marginally-stable quasilinear context, Nu ~ Ra^(1/3) in agreement with classical scaling arguments.

MSTE paper abstract (for reference):

In  this  work,  we  investigate  a  quasilinear  form  of  the  Rayleigh-B ́enardproblem which describes the bulk one-dimensional properties of convection without resolving theturbulent dynamics.  We represent perturbations away from the mean using a sum of marginally-stable eigenmodes.  By constraining the perturbation amplitudes,  the marginal stability criterionallows us to evolve the background temperature profile under the influence of multiple eigenmodesrepresenting flows at different length scales.  We find the quasilinear system evolves to an equilibriumstate  where  advective  and  diffusive  fluxes  sum  to  a  constant.   These  marginally-stable  thermalequilibria (MSTE) are exact solutions of the quasilinear equations.  The mean MSTE temperatureprofiles have thinner boundary layers and larger Nusselt numbers than thermally-equilibrated 2Dand 3D simulations of the full nonlinear equations.  MSTE solutions exhibit a classic boundary-layerscaling of the Nusselt number Nu with the Rayleigh number Ra of Nu∼Ra1/3.  When an MSTEis used as initial conditions for a 2D simulation, we find that Nu quickly equilibrates without theburst of turbulence often induced by purely conductive initial conditions, but we also find that thekinetic energy is too large and viscously attenuates on a long viscous time scale.